"SPPARKS WWW Site"_sws :c
:link(sws,index.html)

:line

Open-Source Distribution :h3

SPPARKS comes with no warranty of any kind.  As each source file
states in its header, it is a copyrighted code that is distributed
free-of-charge, under the terms of the "GNU Public License"_gnu (GPL),
or sometimes by request under the terms of the "GNU Lesser General
Public License (LGPL)"_gnu2.  This is often referred to as open-source
distribution - see "www.gnu.org"_gnuorg or
"www.opensource.org"_opensource.  The legal text of the GPL or LGPL is
in the LICENSE file that is included in the SPPARKS distribution.

:link(gnu,http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
:link(gnu2,http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-2.1.html)
:link(gnuorg,http://www.gnu.org)
:link(opensource,http://www.opensource.org)

Here is a summary of what the GPL means for SPPARKS users:

(1) Anyone is free to use, modify, or extend SPPARKS in any way they
choose, including for commercial purposes.

(2) If you distribute a modified version of SPPARKS, it must remain
open-source, meaning you distribute it under the terms of the GPL.
You should clearly annotate such a code as a derivative version of
SPPARKS.

(3) If you release any code that includes SPPARKS source code, then it
must also be open-sourced, meaning you distribute it under the terms
of the GPL.

(4) If you give SPPARKS files to someone else, the GPL LICENSE file and
source file headers (including the copyright and GPL notices) should
remain part of the code.

:line

In the spirit of an open-source code, these are various ways you can
contribute to making SPPARKS better.  You can send email to the
"authors"_thanks.html on any of these items.

If you write/add a new feature to the code, let us know and we can
include it in the general distribution.  :ulb,l

If you find a bug, report it. :l

If you perform an interesting calculation with SPPARKS or write a
paper using SPPARKS results, let us know and we can include a brief
description, image, movie on the "SPPARKS WWW page"_sws. :l

Send an email if you find an error or omission in the "SPPARKS
documentation"_doc/Manual.html, or have a suggestion for something to
clarify or include. :l

Point prospective users to the "SPPARKS WWW Site"_sws or link to it
from your WWW site. :l

Cash.  Small denominations, unmarked bills preferred.  Leave in paper
sack on desk.  "VISA"_email also accepted.  Chocolate chip cookies
encouraged. :ule,l

:link(pd,doc/Manual.html)
:link(email,mailto:sjplimp@sandia.gov)
