"SPPARKS WWW Site"_sws :c
:link(sws,index.html)

:line

Pictures & Movies from SPPARKS Simulations :h3

"welding"_#welding: welding models
"additive manufacturing"_#am: additive manufacturing models
"rechrystallization"_#recrystallize: recrystallization models
"hybrid phase field"_#phase-field: hybrid phase-field Potts model
"temperature growth"_#temp-growth: temperature-dependent grain growth
"hafnium dioxide"_#hafnium: hafnium dioxide surface growth
"abnormal"_#abnormal: abnormal grain growth
"erbium hydrides"_#erbium:  diffusion in Erbium hydrides
"thin film growth"_#thinfilm: thin film growth
"nanoporous metals"_#nanoporous: diffusion in nanoporous metals
"nuclear fuel sintering"_#sintering: microstructural evolution due to sintering in a nuclear fuel
"nuclear fuel gas transport"_#bubble: fission gas transport in a nuclear fuel :tb(s=:)

Pictures on this page are shown in small size.  Click on the image to
view a larger version.

For movies on this page, click on the small image to trigger the
animation.

:line
:line

Welding models :h4,link(welding)

This is work by John Mitchell, Theron Rodgers, Jon Madison, and Veena
Tikare (Sandia) on models of the welding process to join two metal
pieces together.  An arc welding spot passes over the surface, melting
material in both pieces.  The recrystallization process and resulting
microstructure creates the join.  Since grain growth is a strong
function of temperature, the moving 3d temperature profile induces
interesting patterns of grain growth.

The first image is the cover image for one of the articles referenced
below.  The next two images show the top surface of the weld as the
arc spot passes over it.  The second is a link to a movie.  The next
two images compare simulation microstructures to experimental weld
micrographs at the top and bottom (root) surfaces of the weld.  The
next image shows results from a simulation where the arc spot
size/intensity is pulsed in time; the next image is views of the
top/bottom surfaces of the welded pieces.  The last two images are a
snapshot and movie of how a heat source with particular shape can
alter the microstructure of a material which has already been annealed
to an initial microstructure.

:image(images/msmse17_small.jpg,images/msmse17.jpg)
:image(images/weld_top_small.jpg,images/weld_top.jpg)
:image(images/weld_top_small.jpg,movies/weld_top.mov)
:image(images/weld_expt1_small.jpg,images/weld_expt1.jpg)
:image(images/weld_expt2_small.jpg,images/weld_expt2.jpg)
:image(images/weld_pulse_small.jpg,images/weld_pulse.jpg)
:image(images/weld_top_bottom_small.jpg,images/weld_top_bottom.jpg)
:image(images/weld_drag_small.png,images/weld_drag.png)
:image(images/weld_drag_small.png,movies/weld_drag.mov)

These papers describes the models in more detail:

[A Monte Carlo model for 3D grain evolution during welding],
T. M. Rodgers, J. A. Mitchell, and V. Tikare, Modelling and Simulation
in Materials Science and Engineering, 25, 064006 (2017),
("abstract"_abstracts/msmse17.html)

[Predicting Mesoscale Microstructural Evolution in Electron Beam
Welding], T. M. Rodgers, J. D. Madison, V. Tikare, and M. C. Maguire,
of the Minerals, Metals & Materials Society (JOM), 68, 1419-1426
(2016).  ("abstract"_abstracts/jom16.html)

:line

Additive manufacturing models :h4,link(am)

This is work by Theron Rodgers, Jon Madison, and Veena Tikare (Sandia)
on models of the additive manufacturing (AM) process for laser melting
and crystallization of metal powders.

The first image is a diagram of the AM process with both experimental
and simulation results for microstructure side-by-side.  The next two
images show a metal cube of microstructured metal, deposited and
annealed one layer at a time.  The second is a link to a movie of the
process.  The next two images are the same process for a cylindrical
shell geometry, with a thermal diffusion effect added to the model.
Again the second image is a link to a movie.

:image(images/am_expt_small.jpg,images/am_expt.jpg)
:image(images/am_cross_hatch_brick_small.jpg,images/am_cross_hatch_brick.jpg)
:image(images/am_cross_hatch_brick_small.jpg,movies/am_cross_hatch_brick.mov)
:image(images/am_cylinder_diffusion_small.jpg,images/am_cylinder_diffusion.jpg)
:image(images/am_cylinder_diffusion_small.jpg,movies/am_cylinder_diffusion.mov)

These papers describes the work in more detail:

[Simulation of metal additive manufacturing microstructures using
kinetic Monte Carlo], T. M. Rodgers, J. D. Madison, V. Tikare,
Computational Materials Science 135, 78–89 (2017).
("abstract"_abstracts/cms17.html)

[Process-Structure Linkages Using a Data Science Approach: Application
to Simulated Additive Manufacturing Data], E. Popova, T. M. Rodgers,
X. Gong, A, Cecen, J. D. Madison, and S. R. Kalidindi, Integrating
Matererials and Manufacturing Innovation, 6, 54–68 (2017).
("abstract"_abstracts/immi17.html)

[Modeling of additive manufacturing processes for metals: Challenges
and opportunities], M. M. Francois, A. Sun, W. E. King, N. J. Henson,
D. Tourret, C. A. Bronkhorst, N. N. Carlson, C. K. Newman, T. Haut,
J. Bakosi, J. W. Gibbs, V. Livescu, S. A. Vander Wiel, A. J. Clarke,
M. W. Schraad, T. Blacker, H. Lim, T. Rodgers, S. Owen, F. Abdeljawad,
J. Madison, A. T. Anderson, J-L. Fattebert, R. M. Ferencz,
N. E. Hodge, S. A. Khairallah, and O. Walton, Current Opinion in Solid
State and Materials Science, 21, 198–206 (2017).
("abstract"_abstracts/cossms17.html)

:line

Recrystallization models :h4,link(recrystallize)

This is work by Jon Madison and Veena Tikare (Sandia) and Liz Holm
(CMU) on modeling dynamic recrystallization with application to
nuclear fuels.  The recyrstallization model allow for three distinct
processes: damage accumulation, nucleation and growth of damage- free
regions, and subsequent evolution of recrystallized grains.

The two images below show a series of simulation times steps for (at
top or left) a population of grains colored by an idealized "spin"
value and (at bottom or right) the stored energy present at various
locations throughout the microstructure.  Using a hybridized kinetic
Monte Carlo and cellular automata approach, stored energy in the
system is increased according to some incoming flux resulting in
recrystallization events once that stored energy reaches a previously
determined threshold value on a grain by grain basis. Simultaneously,
curvature driven grain growth ensues before, during and following
recrystallization providing for dyanimc recrystallization events
throughout the microstructure spatially and temporally.

:image(images/recrystallize1_small.jpg,images/recrystallize1.jpg)
:image(images/recrystallize2_small.jpg,images/recrystallize2.jpg)
 
This paper describes the model in more detail:

[A Hybrid Simulation Methodology for Modeling Dynamic Recrystallization
in U02 LWR Nuclear Fuels], J.D. Madison, V. Tikare, E.A. Holm, Journal
of Nuclear Materials, 425, 173-180 (2012).
("abstract"_abstracts/jnm12.html)

:line

Hybrid phase-field and Potts model for grain growth :h4,link(phase-field)

This is work by Eric Homer (BYU, eric.homer at byu.edu) and Veena
Tikare (Sandia, vtikare at sandia.gov) and Liz Holm (CMU) on a hybrid
model that uses both a Cahn-Hilliard phase-field model and Monte Carlo
Potts model.  It can be used to efficiently simulate grain growth in a
two-phase system controlled by diffusion.  It is implemented in
SPPARKS via the "app_style potts/pfm"_doc/app_potts_pfm.html" command.

The left image shows snapshots of the grain structure, phase
structure, and composition at various times for a two-component,
two-phase system.  The right iamge shows the same for nucleation and
phase transformations in the two-component, two-phase system.

:image(images/phase_field1_small.jpg,images/phase_field1.jpg)
:image(images/phase_field2_small.jpg,images/phase_field2.jpg)

This paper describes the model in detail:

[Hybrid Potts-phase field model for coupled
microstructural-compositional evolution], E. R. Homer, V. Tikare,
E. A. Holm, Computaional Materials Science, 69, 414-423
(2013). ("abstract"_abstracts/cms13.html)

:line

Temperature-dependent grain growth :h4,link(temp-growth)

This is work by Veena Tikare (vtikare at sandia.gov), John Mitchell
(jamitch at sandia.gov) both at Sandia, and Justin Roberts (jrober at
sandia.gov) at Brigham Young University to simulate normal,
curvature-driven grain growth with variation in grain boundary
mobility due to a temperature gradient.  This is a modified Potts
model of grain growth which includes the local mobility of grain
boundaries based on the local temperature.  These images and movies
show grain growth with a linear grain boundary mobility gradient
applied in the X-direction.  The mobility is high at the left and low
at the right.

:image(images/temperature_growth_small.jpg,images/temperature_growth.jpg)
:image(images/temperature_growth_small.jpg,movies/temperature_growth.avi)
:image(images/temperature_growth_small.jpg,movies/temperature_growth.ogv)

Image, 1 Mb AVI movie, 3 Mb OGV movie

This paper describes the model and results of similar simulations:

[Three-Dimensional Simulation of Grain Growth of in a Thermal Gradient
with Non-Uniform Grain Boundary Mobility], A. L. Garcia, V. Tikare and
E. A. Holm, Scripta Materialia 59, 661-664 (2008).
("abstract"_abstracts/scripta08.html)

:line

Hafnium dioxide surface growth :h4,link(hafnium)

This is work by Mahdi Shirazi (mahdi.shirazi at tyndall.ie) and Simon
Elliott (simon.elliott at tyndall.ie) at the Tyndall National
Institute in Cork, Ireland.  Movie editing was by Kevin
Berwick(kevin.berwick at dit.ie) of the Dublin Institute of
Technology.  The movie shows the the growth of Hafnium dioxide by
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD).  Hafnium dioxide is used in
microelectronics as a high-k dielectric in modern transistors.

In this study, activation energies, which affect the growth rate and
the time evolution of the film, have been obtained by {ab initio}
calculations using Density Functional Theory (DFT).  Multiple proton
diffusion, steric effects, structural relaxation and cooperative
effects are included for the first time in an ALD growth simulation,
using SPPARKS.  The movie shows 40 growth cycles, simulated on the
Stokes supercomputer at the Irish Centre for High-End Computing.

:image(images/hafnium_small.jpg,images/hafnium.png)
:image(images/hafnium_small.jpg,movies/hafnium.mpg)

Image and a 36 Mb MPG movie

This paper describes the DFT methodology used to calculate kMC input
parameters:

[Multiple Proton Diffusion and Film Densification in Atomic Layer
Deposition Modeled by Density Functional Theory], M. Shirazi and
S. D. Elliott, Chemistry of Materials, 25, 878-889 (2013).
("abstract"_abstracts/cm13.html)

:line

Abnormal grain growth :h4,link(abnormal)

This is work by Liz Holm (eaholm at sandia.gov) at Sandia and Todd
Hoffmann (todd.hoffmann at asu.edu) and his advisor at Carnegie
Mellon, to study the mechanisms and statistics associated with
abnormal grain growth. In grain growth, when the system is annealed,
grain boundaries will move and rearrange so as to increase the average
grain size and decrease the grain boundary area per unit volume. In
normal grain growth, this occurs relatively uniformly, but in abnormal
grain growth, one grain grows at the expense of the others. Abnormal
grain growth can have many causes. Here the effects of static particle
dispersions on grain growth are studied. Particles should pin grain
boundaries in positions that maximize their contact with the
particles, so that grain growth cannot proceed. However, occasionally
one grain breaks free and is able to grow at the expense of others,
leading to abnormal growth.

The on-lattice SPPARKS application ("app_style
potts/pin"_doc/app_potts_pin.html) that runs this model implements a
Potts model of grain growth and also allows for inert pinning
particles.  The pinning particles can be inserted preferentially at
grain boundaries or throughtout the system.  Several hundred
independent runs were made on 300x300x300 lattices, each of at least a
million Monte Carlo steps (sweep over all lattice sites) at finite
simulation temperature, to acquire enough data for statistical
analysis.

The images and movies show typical results for systems with 5 volume
percent pinning particles, inserted when the average grain radius was
10 sites.  In the normal case, the system becomes fully pinned.  In
the second case, abnormal growth eventually occurs.

:image(images/normal_small.jpg,images/normal.jpg)
:image(images/abnormal_small.jpg,images/abnormal.jpg)
:image(images/normal_small.jpg,movies/normal.avi)
:image(images/abnormal_small.jpg,movies/abnormal.avi)

Two images and two 1.5 Mb AVI movies

:line

Diffusion in Erbium hydrides :h4,link(erbium)

This is work by Corbett Battaile (ccbatta at sandia.gov) and Steve
Plimpton at Sandia, to model the mobility of gaseous species such as
tritium and helium in metal hydrides, like erbium.  Such hydrides are
commonly used for neutron generation in many applications in industry,
medicine, and national security, including petroleum exploration,
explosives detection, toxic waste analysis, and boron neutron capture
therapy.  As tritium decays into helium, the helium gas clusters to
form bubbles, often found to be preferentially oriented along \{111\}
planes in the erbium lattice.

The on-lattice SPPARKS application ("app_style
erbium"_doc/app_erbium.html) that runs this model uses an fcc lattice
with additional tetrahedral and octrahedral interstitial sites.  Both
the tritium and helium can diffuse through the lattice on the
interstitial sites.

The image is a snapshot from a simulation on 1024 processors of a
500x500x500 unit-cell model (2 billion sites) which encodes the list
of 1-, 2-, and 3-site migration mechanisms for the two mobile species.
The helium (red) diffuses but is not yet aggregating due to a lack of
appropriate binding and barrier energies for the various event
configurations.  These values (inputs to SPPARKS) are currently being
calculated via density functional theory in the electronic structure
code "SeqQuest"_http://dft.sandia.gov/Quest.

:image(images/erbium_small.png,images/erbium.png)

:line

Thin film growth :h4,link(thinfilm)

This is work by Ed Webb (ebwebb at sandia.gov), Xiaowang Zhou (xzhou
at sandia.gov), and Steve Plimpton (sjplimp at sandia.gov) at Sandia,
to model thin film deposition and growth.  For many thin film
applications, a high degree of control is desired over film properties
including surface/interface roughness, film texture, grain structure,
and defect content.  For example, controlling void content is critical
to a number of applications where voids created during deposition lead
to shortened device lifetimes.  Interface roughness is also important
to many photovoltaic, microelectronic, and optical thin film
applications when multilayered films are deposited.  On-lattice KMC
models can be used to study many of these effects, though they cannot
capture effects like dislocation formation in the depositing crystal.

The on-lattice SPPARKS application ("app_style
diffusion"_doc/app_diffusion.html) which ran these Ni models uses an
underlying triangular lattice (2d) or fcc lattice (3d) and defines two
types of events (deposition and diffusion).  Nearest-neighbor and/or
2nd nearest-neighbor (Schwoebel) hops can be enabled or disabled.  In
these simulations, all deposition was performed at normal incidence.

The first 3 images and accompanying 3 movies are of 2d growth under 3
conditions.  The first is with no Schwoebel hops (which might be
suppressed experimentally by adding impurities to the system) and
results in a thin film with high porosity.  The 2nd and 3rd are with
Schwoebel hops at low and high temperatures (250 and 600K).  In the
low-temperature case there are about 3 diffusive hops per deposition
event.  In the high-temperature case, the ratio is 72000, resulting in
a much smoother film.

The next 3 images are 3d growth (on a 2d surface), again under 3
conditions.  The first two are with no Schwoebel hops at low and high
temperatures (300 and 400K).  The third is with Schwoebel hops at
300K.  Similar effects as in the 2d case are observed, though the
system is harder to visualize.

In the final image, a rough surface (sinusoidal hillocks) was annealed
at 500K for 10,000 seconds with a diffusion-only model in a fcc model,
both with and without Schwoebel events.  In both case the unstable
surface asperities (top of figure) turned 45 degrees to a (111)
orientation to maximize the surface stablility.  However, without
Schwoebel hops (middle of figure), the system lacks the ability to
anneal out terraces.  With Schwoebel hops (bottom of figure), terraces
were all annealed out and clear (111) and (100) facets developed.

:image(images/thin_2d_no_schwoebel_small.jpg,images/thin_2d_no_schwoebel.jpg)
:image(images/thin_2d_schwoebel_lotemp_small.jpg,images/thin_2d_schwoebel_lotemp.jpg)
:image(images/thin_2d_schwoebel_hitemp_small.jpg,images/thin_2d_schwoebel_hitemp.jpg)

:image(images/thin_2d_no_schwoebel_small.jpg,movies/thin_2d_no_schwoebel.mov)
:image(images/thin_2d_schwoebel_lotemp_small.jpg,movies/thin_2d_schwoebel_lotemp.mov)
:image(images/thin_2d_schwoebel_hitemp_small.jpg,movies/thin_2d_schwoebel_hitemp.mov)

:image(images/thin_3d_no_schwoebel_lotemp_small.jpg,images/thin_3d_no_schwoebel_lotemp.jpg)
:image(images/thin_3d_no_schwoebel_hitemp_small.jpg,images/thin_3d_no_schwoebel_hitemp.jpg)
:image(images/thin_3d_schwoebel_small.jpg,images/thin_3d_schwoebel.jpg)

:image(images/surf_evolution_small.png,images/surf_evolution.png)

Three images and three 10 Mb QuickTime movies of 2d thin film growth.
Three images of 3d film growth.  One image (yellow atoms) of hillock
rearrangement on a 2d surface.

:line

Diffusion in nanoporous metals :h4,link(nanoporous)

This is work by Greg Wagner (gjwagne at sandia.gov) at Sandia, to
model diffusion in nanoporous metals.  Such materials have a range of
applications based on their very large surface-to-volume ratios.  At
Sandida nanoporous palladium particles are being studied for use as a
hydrogen storage medium, and nanoporous gold wires are being tested
for use as electrodes in super-capacitors.  As these complex materials
age, especially at elevated temperatures, the evolution of their
nanostructures with time can greatly affect material properties and
performance.  KMC can model this aging over long timescales.

The on-lattice SPPARKS application ("app_style
diffusion"_doc/app_diffusion.html) that runs this model uses an fcc
lattice and energies and barrier heights calcaluted from atomistic
simulations using embedded atom method (EAM) potentials.  Diffusion in
the KMC model is described by Kawasaki dynamics, in which each event
is the motion of an individual atom.  A basic atom hop is defined as
movement to any vacant neighboring site.  Special consideration is
given to Schwoebel barriers, in which an atom diffuses up or down a
ledge between atomic monolayers, which is effectively a hop to a
lattice location two sites away.

The images and associated movies are a bulk diffusion model with
60x60x60 unit cells (0.864 million sites) and a 50% porosity factor.
If we define the length scale of the system as the inverse of the
surface-to-volume ratio, then we observe the fourth power of this
quantity grows linearly with time, in agreement with theory.

:image(images/porous1_small.jpg,images/porous1.jpg)
:image(images/porous2_small.jpg,images/porous2.jpg)
:image(images/porous1_small.jpg,movies/porous1.mov)
:image(images/porous2_small.jpg,movies/porous2.mov)

Two images and two QuickTime movies (6 and 2 Mb)

:line

Microstructural evolution due to sintering in a nuclear fuel :h4,link(sintering)

This is work by Veena Tikare (vtikare at sandia.gov) at Sandia and
Cristina Garcia Cardona (cgarcia at sciences.sdsu.edu) at San Diego
State Univ, to simulate microstructural evolution during sintering.
They augmented a Potts model of grain growth with three additional
physical effects: surface diffusion, vacancy diffusion, and vacancy
annihilation.  The implementation of the annihilation algorithm in
SPPARKS was non-trivial as an internal vacancy is annihilated by
collapsing all the sites along a line from it to an external surface.
In parallel this involves moving all the sites along that line towards
the vacancy, requiring interprocessor communication.  This sintering
model is able to capture all the necessary mechanism to simulate
simple solid-state sintering correctly.  It was demonstrated by
comparing it to 3D, in-situ images taken in a high-energy synchrotron
during the sintering of Cu particles. The images below are from a
simulation of the sintering process for a powder of Cu particles.  The
first pair of images are for an initial material density of 69%.  As
it compacts, an intermediate density of 79% is shown.  The final pair
of images are for a compacted density at the end of the simulation of
83%.  Both 3d pictures of the full model and 2d slices are shown. The
density versus time profiles, microstructural images and grain size
distributions for this system are in good agreement with experiment.

:image(images/sinter_bulk0_small.png,images/sinter_bulk0.png)
:image(images/sinter_slice0_small.png,images/sinter_slice0.png)

:image(images/sinter_bulk1_small.png,images/sinter_bulk1.png)
:image(images/sinter_slice1_small.png,images/sinter_slice1.png)

:image(images/sinter_bulk2_small.png,images/sinter_bulk2.png)
:image(images/sinter_slice2_small.png,images/sinter_slice2.png)

This paper gives more details of the model and simulations:

[Parallel Simulation of 3D Sintering], C. G. Cardona, V. Tikare,
S. J. Plimpton, Int J Computational Materials Science and Surface
Engineering, 4, 37-54 (2011).  ("abstract"_abstracts/ijcmsse11.html)

:line

Fission gas transport in a nuclear fuel :h4,link(bubble)

This is work by Veena Tikare (vtikare at sandia.gov) at Sandia to
study fission gas bubble transport in Light Water Reactor (LWR) fuel.
During operation, Xe and Kr gas atoms are produced as fission
by-products.  They are highly insoluble in the fuel matrix and
precipitate to form two types of bubbles, small (~10 nm) intragranular
bubbles and larger (~500 nm) intergranular bubbles.  As the gas
accumulates, it eventually finds it way to grain boundaries by
diffusion and the intergranular bubbles grow, initially by gas
accumulation and later by coalescence.  Eventually coalescence of the
intergranular bubbles progress to the point that they percolate,
releasing the pressurized gas to the external surface.  The bubbles
sinter back and the process repeats itself.  This process of
percolation and gas release has important implications for fuel
performance and longevity.  To model these effects, a Potts model of
grain growth was augmented to incorporate gas generation, gas atom
diffusion, precipitation to form bubbles, and surface diffusion of the
gas bubbles.  This model was used to study the formation, growth and
percolation of the intragranular gas bubbles in LWR fuels.  Images
from such a simulation are shown below; the first image shows only the
gas bubbles in a two-grain microstructure with periodic boundary
conditions.  The inter- and intra-granular bubbles are clearly shown.
The next 2 images show gas bubble growth at the planar grain boundary
during the simulation.  The final image shows the percolating bubble,
in dark blue, at the end of the simulation.

:image(images/bubble1_small.png,images/bubble1.png)
:image(images/bubble2_small.png,images/bubble2.png)
:image(images/bubble3_small.png,images/bubble3.png)
:image(images/bubble4_small.png,images/bubble4.png)
