[Process-Structure Linkages Using a Data Science Approach: Application
to Simulated Additive Manufacturing Data]

E. Popova, T. M. Rodgers, X. Gong, A, Cecen, J. D. Madison, and
S. R. Kalidindi, Integrating Matererials and Manufacturing Innovation,
6, 54â€“68 (2017).

A novel data science workflow is developed and demonstrated to extract
process-structure linkages (i.e., reduced-order model) for
microstructure evolution problems when the final microstructure
depends on (simulation or experimental) processing parameters. This
workflow consists of four main steps: data pre-processing,
microstructure quantification, dimensionality reduction, and
extraction/validation of process-structure linkages. Methods that can
be employed within each step vary based on the type and amount of
available data. In this paper, this data-driven workflow is applied to
a set of synthetic additive manufacturing microstructures obtained
using the Potts-kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) approach.  Additive
manufacturing techniques inherently produce complex microstructures
that can vary significantly with processing conditions. Using the
developed workflow, a lowdimensional data-driven model was established
to correlate process parameters with the predicted final
microstructure.  Additionally, the modular workflows developed and
presented in this work facilitate easy dissemination and curation by
the broader community.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
