[Parallel simulation via SPPARKS of on-lattice kinetic and Metropolis
Monte Carlo models for materials processing]

John A Mitchell, Fadi Abdeljawad, Corbett Battaile, Cristina
Garcia-Cardona, Elizabeth A Holm, Eric R Homer, Jon Madison, Theron M
Rodgers, Aidan P Thompson, Veena Tikare, Ed Webb and Steven J
Plimpton, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and
Engineering, 31, 055001 (2023).

SPPARKS is an open-source parallel simulation code for developing and
running various kinds of on-lattice Monte Carlo models at the atomic
or meso scales. It can be used to study the properties of solid-state
materials as well as model their dynamic evolution during
processing. The modular nature of the code allows new models and
diagnostic computations to be added without modification to its core
functionality, including its parallel algorithms. A variety of models
for microstructural evolution (grain growth), solid-state diffusion,
thin film deposition, and additive manufacturing (AM) processes are
included in the code. SPPARKS can also be used to implement grid-based
algorithms such as phase field or cellular automata models, to run
either in tandem with a Monte Carlo method or independently. For very
large systems such as AM applications, the Stitch I/O library is
included, which enables only a small portion of a huge system to be
resident in memory. In this paper we describe SPPARKS and its parallel
algorithms and performance, explain how new Monte Carlo models can be
added, and highlight a variety of applications which have been
developed within the code.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
